Multiple voices appear as if by magic, as if no effort was expanded. In the quest to get
rid of the author in favor of "the novel," we are left with lexicons and styles,
unattached to any humans. Agents emerge, in the subject position of Bakhtin's sentences:
genres, the novel, 

But we don't get any insight on these idealized structures living and evolving on their
own. Each time they must be instantiated through specific material circumstance: at the
very least an author or a group of authors at work. That process of instantiation is far
from frictionless, requiems immense energy and technique. In this way, for example, the
effect of realism is achieved through systematic collection of "raw material" or "local
color," hung on the scaffolding of structure. But again, when I say hung on the
scaffolding,

The do not see beneath the superficial hustle and bustle of literary process the major and
crucial fates of literature and language, whose great heroes turn out to be first and
foremost genres, and whose "trends" and "schools" are but second- or third-rank
protagonists. 


Together. Reconstructive. Reassembly. Puncture the illusion of machine authorship. But
also the illusion of single-brain, human authorship which also usually implicates
instrumental and social externalities.

Machine authorship and human authorship are kind of the same at the end.


the formal "prerequisites [...] constitute a criticism of other genres" [@bakhtin, 10].

"The new cultural and creative consciousness lives in an actively polyglot world. The
world becomes polyglot, once and for all and irreversibly. The period of national
languages, coexisting but closed and deaf to each other, comes to an end [@bakhtin, 12].
Confusion of perspectives

"intense activization of external and internal polyglossia" 

"The language of the novel is a system of languages that mutually and ideologically
interanimate each other. It is impossible to to describe and analyze it as a single
unitary language." [47]. Wait a second! The language of "novels," plural, constitutes a
system of languages. But the language of any given novel, like the supposedly paradigmatic
Dostoevsky examples, is expressed or at least filtered through an individual, dare I write
it, assemblage. In this way, there might be a huge difference between folk speech as
represented by Dostoevsky, an avid reader of newspapers, and Zora Neale Hurston, a trained
folklorist. Their methods for converting the notion of "folk" into a distinct literary
style differed substantially. Such methods may fall short of "pluralism," deviating little
from one author's style. In another's oeuvre, we may find actual snippets of borrowed or
observed conversation, and their echoes---in another's, a fanciful caricature.

Paradoxically, to understand machine literature we must 

For all the theoretical commitment to social aspects of language, as reflected in
veritable literary-critical terms such as heteroglossia, polyphony, or intertextuality, a
methodological 

Mikhail Bakhtin

Heteroglossia. Technique. Structure.

Here, we may also borrow from rich methods developed in the fields of genetic criticism
and textual criticism, long attuned to the minutia of literary production. Positive.
Without psychologism. The reconstructive method instead aims to map out the flows of
information between authorial agents. Emergent.

Media archaeology. Book history. Platform tools and other cognitive aids. Editorial input.
Collectives. 
