---
title: Many Voices in One: Co-authorship as a Form of Distributed Cognition

---

The practice of writing networked documents, that is digital texts connected
to other texts via the Internet, has unquestionably transformed the very
meaning of being a writer. Neither the diffuse deconstructivst notions of
"discourse writing itself" nor romantic ideas about a writer-genius are
sufficient to understanding massively collaborative projects such as Wikipedia
or the Linux kernel, both documents that comprise millions of lines of text
and thousands of author contributors. In this essay I introduce the notion of
distributed cognition, borrowed from recent work in cognitive science and
philosophy of mind. I subsequently outline a novel, system-based approach to
the study of co-authored materials.

### 5.4 Ethno-Psychology


### 5.5 Vygotsky Circle (+Luria)

### 5.6 Americans

Michael Cole. p118
More than a century later, Donald Norman. James Carroll.

I construct this brief genealogy of technological skepticism of a particular
kind to note that all of the above example contains within them a bifurcated
model, that puts some notion of inner "natural mind" into an often problematic
relationship with technologies of externalized cognitive augmentation.

### Extended Cognition

In this concern with the externalized forms of private thought, Lazarus and
Steinthal anticipate not only the turn to collective intelligence in the end of
the ninetieth century (CHECK ON THAT), but to extended cognition at the end
of the twentieth. The so-called sMoscow school of psychology, *Völkerpsychologie* 

note only that the texts quoted above already contain the kernel of the
extended mind hypothesis. Norman, writing in the 1990a traces a direct lineage
between himself and Wundt through the Soviet social-historical schools of the
1920s, as reflected in the works of Leontev, Luria, and Vygotsky--not to the
collective psychology of Alexander Luria, Lev Vygotsky, and Kurt Lewin
translated into English until late 1970s and early 1980s.[^ln4-halbwachs] And
Hutchins and cognitive artifacts by Dan Norman. Hypothesis of extended
cognition. Effect on the study of literature.

The Hypothesis of Extended Cognition (HEC) The hypothesis of extended cognition
(HEC) holds that certain cognitive processes can be viewed as extending beyond
the boundaries of the human body into their physical, social, and symbolic
environments. Andy Clark and David Chalmers suggest an example involving Otto
and Inga: two individuals on their way to an art exhibition. Inga remembers the
location of the museum by memory. Otto suffers from Alzheimer's, and must
consult his notebook to find the exhibition. Clark and Chalmers posit that the
information in Otto's notebook is the same as the information in Inga's head.
And were the notebook literally inside Otto's brain somehow, we would have no
trouble equating the two cognitive acts of remembrance: Inga simply remembers
how to get to the exhibition, while Otto incorporates some cognitive aids to
facilitate his memory.6

For the externalists—Clark, Chalmers, Wilson, and others—the differences
between Otto's and Inga's case are superficial: both are engaged in essentially
identical cognitive tasks of recollection. On this view Otto's usage of a
notebook constitutes something like a unified cognitive system, which
encompasses parts of Otto's brain and parts of the physical pen-and-paper
apparatus. The pen and the notebook simply constitute the material or
technological elements of the system, enabling the storage and the retrieval of
information. Similarly, the notation itself—the alphabet by which Otto is able
to encode the needed information—can be seen as a symbolic and social component
of the system. Not just Otto's notes, but all language, according to the
externalists, serves as a kind of ready-made mental scaffolding, which enables
a level of computation and analysis otherwise unavailable to primates.7 The
study of cognition therefore must expand beyond the skin-and-bone boundary of
the human brain to include the social, symbolic, and material (technological)
artifacts involved in human thought. To study Otto's brain is to also to study
the pen, the notebook, and the notes Otto takes when he uses these things to
remember the details of his appointment.  In another paradigmatic example of
HEC-based analysis, Edwin Hutchins examines the workings of a commercial
airliner in flight, showing "how the cockpit system performs the cognitive task
of computing and remembering a set of correspondences between airspeed and wind
configuration."8 The system-level view of cognition draws attention to the
combination of mechanical, electronic, and biological processes responsible for
the flow and storage of information within the plane's cockpit. The system can
be said to "remember" its speeds, writes Hutchins. It "computes," "controls,"
"makes use of representations" and otherwise distributes cognitive labor. Were
we to ask, "Who is landing the plane?" we would expect Hutchins to answer "the
cockpit system as a whole."9

Two types of extension The opponents of HEC reject the view of cognition as
anything other than what goes on inside the body and the brain. Fred Adams and
Ken Aizawa in particular have staked out a clearly delineated position in
defense of what the authors call "contingent intracranialism." On this view,
the "mark of the cognitive" is located squarely within the brain, as a matter
of a contingent empirical fact.10 To prove their point, Adams and Aizawa
compare our intuitions about human tool use and animal digestion. Imagine
someone using loping shears to trim a bush, for example. Although the activity
of "trimming-a-bush" as a whole seems to be a combined product of human
muscular contraction and the mechanical capabilities of the loping shears, we
would not be compelled to think of loping shears as "extended muscular
contraction."

By contrast, something like arachnoid digestion constitutes a digestive process
that is truly external. Arachnoid digestion happens outside of the spider's
body literally: the spider regurgitates digestive enzymes into or unto its
prey. What happens in our stomachs happens outside the strict corporeal
boundaries of the spider. We could therefore meaningfully talk about "extended
digestion" when it comes to spiders. But, for Adams and Aizawa, Otto's
notebook-reliant memory looks less like arachnoid digestion and more like the
discrete movement of muscle against the mechanism of the garden shears. Otto is
not thinking literally outside of his head. Like the man with the garden
shears, he is using a tool to compliment the exercise of some internal,
biological function. But it seems to me that this line of reasoning is simply
begging the question. Adams and Aizawa merely appeal to a scientific standard
of internalism, where the scientific standard is precisely the thing that is
being called into question. One gets the sneaking suspicion that the argument
is really about definitions, with one side appealing to common sense and the
other to scientific standards.11 My own suspicions about HEC rise from the
observation that the existentialist argument seems to contain two distinct
propositions about the nature of cognitive extension, each carrying distinct
implications for practical analysis of complex cognitive tasks. Let's return to
the example suggested by Hutchins in "How a Cockpit Remembers its Speed". We
begin by noting that a plane is a curiously anthropomorphic structure. It has
something like a head, a tail, and a belly: cockpit windows where we would
expect eyes, and a hole where we would expect to see an anus. It is thus easy
to imagine this structure as sentient somehow. We may for example, say "it
thinks, it sees," or "it eats" without much stretching of the imagination.

### Critique of Extended Cognition

Suppose then, instead of discussing a complex, high-level biological process
such as cognition, we were to talk about digestion. The hypothesis of extended
digestion would then hold that digestion is not limited by the human body, and
that it may be seen as a systematic property of the plane as a whole. On this
view, the plane—its service staff and food storage mechanisms—all participate
in digestion, defined by the uptake of food, its distribution, and the disposal
of waste. We may even go as far as to say that digestion is something that
happens in the belly of the plane. Food is conveyed within by some mechanical
means, it is then divvied up among the passengers, processed, and expelled in
bulk with the emptying of the airplane's holding tanks.

How far are we willing to take the proposition of airplane digestion? Not very
far at all, I would argue. Clearly, this is not digestion as we know it. It has
some structural affinities to animal digestion (the food is conveyed within,
broken down, expelled) along with important structural differences (the food it
is not metabolized, for example). Thus a strong claim to airplane digestion
must be rejected as an imprecise metaphor, by which the concept of a given
process is transferred from one entity to another by structural similarity (the
same would hold true were we to consider fueling as a type of digestion).

Such metaphoric transference may prove to be conceptually useful in certain
types of analysis, as when the airlines want to improve the timely feeding of
their passengers, for example. "The plane needs to eat," they might say. "Our
staff has to feed the plane in a timely fashion." But, the metaphor strains
under scrutiny. We may as well stick to a more exacting description of the
process. In any case, what we have done here is extend the natural concept of
"digestion" (in its ordinary meaning) to an inanimate entity, or a system of
entities that includes biological and non-biological components. Furthermore,
we have discovered that such a functional analogy is subject to confusion by
metaphor.

Extrapolating from these observations, we should be able to draw the same
conclusions about cognition. The cockpit may look as if it is "'remembering its
speed," but its "memory"' is a mere metaphor. The two processes— human
remembrance and whatever happens in the cockpit—never reach full equivalence.
The metaphor does not inspire our full commitment. It is an alluring metaphor
however, particularly because the cockpit's shape and location (in relation to
the body of the plane) remind us of the human head. It might be a useful
metaphor for analyzing the information flow within the cockpit, but it is
imprecise when it comes to understanding human cognition as such. All that is
meant by human cognition does not map precisely unto the cognition as applied
to the airplane cockpit. Clearly some parts of the original definition are
simply left out—the firing of neurons and the transmission of glutamate, GABA,
or dopamine. Some aspect of the cockpit's operation may be likened to those
biological processes, but nobody would hold that they are fully equivalent.

There is a possibility of another, weaker claim to extended digestion, to
continue our example. The conveyance of food from the grocery shelves to the
mouth of an individual airplane passenger may well be an important part of that
passenger's digestive process. We are no longer talking about digestion in a
metaphoric sense, as we did when thinking about the belly of the plane. I mean
now literal digestion, as in "the breaking down of food." In that sense, there
is no reason for us to view our own digestion as much different from a
spider's. The preparation of food external to the human body could be viewed
much in the same way as we view arachnoid digestion. Both are external
processes evolved to aid in the break-down of tissues otherwise difficult to
digest internally. The spider regurgitates enzymes, where we use a knife, a
fork, a cheese grater, or any other kitchen implement for that matter.
Following similar logic, we may view the catering company responsible for
preparing the airline food as part of that extended digestion system. The
cooks, the forks, and the stewards all literally facilitate the break-down and
the conveyance of food into the passenger's belly. More than a thought
experiment, the understanding of digestion in this extended sense could be
quite useful in certain types of analysis, as in identifying the cause of
foodborne illness, for example. In the previous case we were making a
biomorphic analogy between two distinct processes: the digestion of food and
the fuelling or the supply of the plane. But now, we are actually trying to
expand the original concept of digestion, usually thought to be an internal
process, to include all sort of external mechanisms. We are no longer making an
imprecise analogy. Our position is one of true digestive externalism.  But in
expanding the definition of digestion outwards, we run into what I would like
to call "the problem of arbitrary limits." Let us return to cognition for the
moment. In thinking about the cognitive tasks involved in landing a plane, we
began by including the cockpit instrumentation and the communication between
the pilots into the equation. But why limit ourselves to the plane in our
analysis? The runway participates in the landing, and so do the dispatchers in
the control tower. We may then say the airport system as a whole is landing the
plane. That too seems to be an arbitrary boundary. The dispatchers rely on a
global network which memorizes, computes, and predicts landing parameters. At
the limits of this query is unbridled monism. The activity of "landing a plane"
begins to lose its meaning when the activity of the pilot is coupled with the
entire universe.

I conclude then, to say that extending the concept of cognition to the cockpit
of the plane is subject to the limit problem. The disavowal of the body and/or
brain as the natural boundary of cognition leads to an arbitrary placement of
yet another boundary. We have simply substituted the natural physical limits of
the brain with those of the airplane cockpit. And nothing holds us back from
pushing the boundaries of cognition ever outward. Every boundary seems
artificial, and every system seems to be a part of a larger system that could
be seen as participating in the cognitive task at hand. In embracing the
extension hypothesis literally, we have traded metaphoric imprecision for the
problem of arbitrary limits.


[^ln11-drucker]: See for example: "The notion of the 'immaterial' text has
become fixed in popular and even critical imagination. [...] Though digital
information is far more fungible than physical inscription, the codes on which
electronic texts are based are themselves material. More to the point, however,
the graphical and dynamic organization of texts continues to function as
textual information in the electronic format [@drucker_digital_2001, 145]."

[^ln11-xerox]: "In most American offices executives instruct subordinates to
'make me a Xerox of this report' rather than 'make me a copy of it.'" From *The
Economist*, 15 Oct. 1966, 299/3as as quoted in the online edition of Oxford
English dictionary. See also schwartz2013.

[^ln11-spirit]: The "spirits" in spirit duplicators have nothing to do with
Hegel. Rather, the device relied on alcohol-based solvents and inks, that gave
spirit copies their distinctive smell. In North America, spirit duplication was
advanced by the aptly named Ditto Corporation.

[^ln11-ooo]: I write "point of view" and "reads" in quotation marks to indicate
the presence of a metaphor. I do not believe objects can properly be said to
have a point of view, this contrary to the principles articulated in
object-oriented ontology [@bryant_onticology_2010, @harman_guerrilla_2005].

[^ln11-literacy]: For more on the European medieval scribal practices see the
influential @mckitterick_books_1994, @clanchy_memory_1979, and @goody_consequences_1963.

[^ln11-quran]: "And thou wast not (able) / To recite a Book before
/ This (Book came), nor art thou / (Able) to transcribe it / With thy right
hand: / In that case, indeed, would / The talkers of vanities / Have doubted
[@ali_meaning_1997, 29:48]."


### McLuhan

McLuhan's Understanding Media is a fitting companion to the modern conversation
on extended cognition, first because it announces its allegiance to the
hypothesis openly and from the very first lines of the treatise, and second
because it so readily exceeds the hypothesis rhetorically, falling into the
traps of metaphoric imprecision and limitless expansion. For those unfamiliar
with the work, it would be useful to know that McLuhan conceives of his project
as a study "on the extensions of man." He writes: During the mechanical ages we
had extended our bodies in space, today, after more than a century of electric
technology, we have extended our central nervous system itself in a global
embrace [...] Rapidly we approach the final phase of the extensions of man—the
technological simulation of consciousness, when the creative process of knowing
will be collectively and corporately extended to the whole of human society,
much as we have already extended our senses and our nerves by the various
media.1 Granted, McLuhan's writing lacks the precision of HEC, which is
advanced from the platforms of analytic philosophy and cognitive science. And
yet, it is clear that throughout Understanding Media, McLuhan is committed to a
version of the extended mind hypothesis, which in his vocabulary translates
into a vision of global, limitless expansion of consciousness, facilitated by
technology. For McLuhan our collective "nervous system" is "technologically
extended to the whole of mankind."2 Such holistic monism is declared literally
as a matter of faith. "The aspiration of our time for wholeness, empathy, and
depth of awareness is a natural adjunct of electric technology," he writes.
"There is a deep faith to be found in this new attitude—a faith that concerns
the ultimate harmony of all being."3 And elsewhere: "In this electric age we
see ourselves being translated more and more in to the form of information,
moving toward the technological extension of consciousness."4 And yet despite
the frequency with which this refrain appears in the book, the author does
little to argue for it. We are asked to subscribe to the extension thesis as a
matter of apriori intuition. Nothing has been said to bolster the claims of the
extension, and most of McLuhan subsequent argument hinges on the reader
accepting this strong version of extension.  Consider for example McLuhan's
quintessential "the medium is the message" argument. I have shown elsewhere
that we cannot take this to be literally true. The principles of information
theory would hold that the medium is precisely content-neutral, particularly
when it comes to the transmission of digital information. So what exactly does
McLuhan means by "the medium is the message?" We must begin by understanding
what he means by "the medium" and "the message." In one sense, he means the
media to denote the conventional array of transition channels: radio, cinema,
literature, television. But in another sense, he means these transition
channels to act literally as extensions of the human sense apparatus. For
example, in the beginning of chapter he writes that "the social consequences of
any medium—that is, of any extension of ourselves—result from the new scale
that is introduced into our affairs by each extension of ourselves, or by any
new technology."5 Elsewhere he writes that "[...] that our human senses, of
which all media are extensions, are also fixed charges [...]."6 The medium, for
McLuhan, is thus a marked concept, different from its dictionary definition in
that it contains the hypothesis of sense-extension.  The message in McLuhan's
sense is equally specialized, and again related to the extension hypothesis.
"The 'message' of any medium or technology is the change of scale or pace or
pattern that introduces into human affairs," writes McLuhan.7 In this sense the
message should not be confused with "content" or "information." The idea of
content only obscures the fact "it is the medium that shapes and controls the
scale and form of human association in action."8 If media and messages are
beginning to sound the same according to these definitions, it is because for
McLuhan they explicitly are the same: "the content of writing or print is
speech,"9 he writes, and "the 'content' of any medium is always another
medium."10 But this really is no thesis at all.  McLuhan's dictum would not
find cultural relevance if his famous dictum was merely a tautology. "The
medium is the message" roughly translates into the proposition that all media,
besides carrying their formal content (or no content at all, as is the case
with electric light in McLuhan's initial example) affect our collective psyche
in some way—in other words, a more generalized, popular version of our
extension hypothesis. But how committed is McLuhan to the analogy between media
and "extended consciousness" or "externalized nervous system." Not very. The
metaphor is alluring but imprecise. For McLuhan everything has the potential to
be mediafied—money, labor, technology, culture. It is all vaguely "an extension
of man," not just the extension of the senses, corporeal, or cognitive
extension. All products of human culture end up reconfiguring human culture as
such—that is the "message" of McLuhan's thesis.  What is at stake here for us?
What does the extension hypothesis mean for the study of human culture? Well,
for one let's note that practically all examples of extended cognition in the
wild—I dare say all thought experiments mentioned or staged in the literature
on HEC—involve literary interfaces. Extended cognition in that sense requires
the storage and retrieval of information, facilitated by a symbolic notation
system, and a medium on which such information can be stored for later
retrieval. For Otto, this system involved a notebook, a calendar, or a planner
perhaps. For the pilots in the cockpit, the flow of information also proceeds
across devices which accept input and offer output in symbolic notation: the
number on the altimeter dial, the iconographic status indicators, the keypad,
and the control panel. It is also worth noting that all such systems and
devices are essentially dumb instruments. They become "cognitive" only in the
moment of interaction. Without Otto, the pen and paper does nothing. It comes
to life only at the point of interface.

The second observation we must make is that the hypothesis of extended
cognition brings the mind out of the head and into the material sphere of
existence. Taking HEC seriously means to supplement fMRI-based cognitive
science with anthropological, social observation of cognition at work. And
since we are talking about tools and habits of thought (rather than neurons, or
brain-matter) we must acknowledge that the formation of the mind, at least in
the extended sense, can span beyond one's own, private mental development.
Extended, the mind gains a shared history.  HEC also implies that the
long-standing anxiety over the impact of cognitive aids on our natural human
capacities—an anxiety that has been around at least since the times of
Socrates, an anxiety that is clearly expressed in Heidegger's philosophy of
technology, and that is featured prominently in the recent cautionary tales of
human decline by Richard Foreman and Nicholas Carr—that anxiety has at least
the merit of considering the mind in its embodied, contextualized form. The
critique acknowledges the impact of technology on our mental habits. But the
negative value assessment is the least interesting part of that argument.
Cognitive aids are only as "good" or as "bad" as the purposes for which they
are used. If calculators have diminished our capacity to do math in our heads,
they have also alleviated much tedium involved in mundane everyday
arithmetic—at the bank, at the supermarket, and at home. And few would argue
that mass literacy (as a technology) had anything but a positive effect on our
society, and that despite whatever effects literacy may have on our "natural"
ability to remember things without writing. "Natural" is, in this case, an
artificial construct, tied to one's willingness to engage in nostalgic reverie
about an idyllic state of unadulterated past.


The Hypothesis of Extended Cognition (HEC) The hypothesis of extended cognition
(HEC) holds that certain cognitive processes can be viewed as extending beyond
the boundaries of the human body into their physical, social, and symbolic
environments. Andy Clark and David Chalmers suggest an example involving Otto
and Inga: two individuals on their way to an art exhibition. Inga remembers the
location of the museum by memory. Otto suffers from Alzheimer's, and must
consult his notebook to find the exhibition. Clark and Chalmers posit that the
information in Otto's notebook is the same as the information in Inga's head.
And were the notebook literally inside Otto's brain somehow, we would have no
trouble equating the two cognitive acts of remembrance: Inga simply remembers
how to get to the exhibition, while Otto incorporates some cognitive aids to
facilitate his memory.6

For the externalists—Clark, Chalmers, Wilson, and others—the differences
between Otto's and Inga's case are superficial: both are engaged in essentially
identical cognitive tasks of recollection. On this view Otto's usage of a
notebook constitutes something like a unified cognitive system, which
encompasses parts of Otto's brain and parts of the physical pen-and-paper
apparatus. The pen and the notebook simply constitute the material or
technological elements of the system, enabling the storage and the retrieval of
information. Similarly, the notation itself—the alphabet by which Otto is able
to encode the needed information—can be seen as a symbolic and social component
of the system. Not just Otto's notes, but all language, according to the
externalists, serves as a kind of ready-made mental scaffolding, which enables
a level of computation and analysis otherwise unavailable to primates.7 The
study of cognition therefore must expand beyond the skin-and-bone boundary of
the human brain to include the social, symbolic, and material (technological)
artifacts involved in human thought. To study Otto's brain is to also to study
the pen, the notebook, and the notes Otto takes when he uses these things to
remember the details of his appointment.  In another paradigmatic example of
HEC-based analysis, Edwin Hutchins examines the workings of a commercial
airliner in flight, showing "how the cockpit system performs the cognitive task
of computing and remembering a set of correspondences between airspeed and wind
configuration."8 The system-level view of cognition draws attention to the
combination of mechanical, electronic, and biological processes responsible for
the flow and storage of information within the plane's cockpit. The system can
be said to "remember" its speeds, writes Hutchins. It "computes," "controls,"
"makes use of representations" and otherwise distributes cognitive labor. Were
we to ask, "Who is landing the plane?" we would expect Hutchins to answer "the
cockpit system as a whole."9

Two types of extension The opponents of HEC reject the view of cognition as
anything other than what goes on inside the body and the brain. Fred Adams and
Ken Aizawa in particular have staked out a clearly delineated position in
defense of what the authors call "contingent intracranialism." On this view,
the "mark of the cognitive" is located squarely within the brain, as a matter
of a contingent empirical fact.10 To prove their point, Adams and Aizawa
compare our intuitions about human tool use and animal digestion. Imagine
someone using loping shears to trim a bush, for example. Although the activity
of "trimming-a-bush" as a whole seems to be a combined product of human
muscular contraction and the mechanical capabilities of the loping shears, we
would not be compelled to think of loping shears as "extended muscular
contraction."

By contrast, something like arachnoid digestion constitutes a digestive process
that is truly external. Arachnoid digestion happens outside of the spider's
body literally: the spider regurgitates digestive enzymes into or unto its
prey. What happens in our stomachs happens outside the strict corporeal
boundaries of the spider. We could therefore meaningfully talk about "extended
digestion" when it comes to spiders. But, for Adams and Aizawa, Otto's
notebook-reliant memory looks less like arachnoid digestion and more like the
discrete movement of muscle against the mechanism of the garden shears. Otto is
not thinking literally outside of his head. Like the man with the garden
shears, he is using a tool to compliment the exercise of some internal,
biological function. But it seems to me that this line of reasoning is simply
begging the question. Adams and Aizawa merely appeal to a scientific standard
of internalsim, where the scientific standard is precisely the thing that is
being called into question. One gets the sneaking suspicion that the argument
is really about definitions, with one side appealing to common sense and the
other to scientific standards.11 My own suspicions about HEC rise from the
observation that the existentialist argument seems to contain two distinct
propositions about the nature of cognitive extension, each carrying distinct
implications for practical analysis of complex cognitive tasks. Let's return to
the example suggested by Hutchins in "How a Cockpit Remembers its Speed". We
begin by noting that a plane is a curiously anthropomorphic structure. It has
something like a head, a tail, and a belly: cockpit windows where we would
expect eyes, and a hole where we would expect to see an anus. It is thus easy
to imagine this structure as sentient somehow. We may for example, say "it
thinks, it sees," or "it eats" without much stretching of the imagination.

Suppose then, instead of discussing a complex, high-level biological process
such as cognition, we were to talk about digestion. The hypothesis of extended
digestion would then hold that digestion is not limited by the human body, and
that it may be seen as a systematic property of the plane as a whole. On this
view, the plane—its service staff and food storage mechanisms—all participate
in digestion, defined by the uptake of food, its distribution, and the disposal
of waste. We may even go as far as to say that digestion is something that
happens in the belly of the plane. Food is conveyed within by some mechanical
means, it is then divvied up among the passengers, processed, and expelled in
bulk with the emptying of the airplane's holding tanks.

How far are we willing to take the proposition of airplane digestion? Not very
far at all, I would argue. Clearly, this is not digestion as we know it. It has
some structural affinities to animal digestion (the food is conveyed within,
broken down, expelled) along with important structural differences (the food it
is not metabolized, for example). Thus a strong claim to airplane digestion
must be rejected as an imprecise metaphor, by which the concept of a given
process is transferred from one entity to another by structural similarity (the
same would hold true were we to consider fueling as a type of digestion).

Such metaphoric transference may prove to be conceptually useful in certain
types of analysis, as when the airlines want to improve the timely feeding of
their passengers, for example. "The plane needs to eat," they might say. "Our
staff has to feed the plane in a timely fashion." But, the metaphor strains
under scrutiny. We may as well stick to a more exacting description of the
process. In any case, what we have done here is extend the natural concept of
"digestion" (in its ordinary meaning) to an inanimate entity, or a system of
entities that includes biological and non-biological components. Furthermore,
we have discovered that such a functional analogy is subject to confusion by
metaphor.

Extrapolating from these observations, we should be able to draw the same
conclusions about cognition. The cockpit may look as if it is "'remembering its
speed," but its "memory"' is a mere metaphor. The two processes— human
remembrance and whatever happens in the cockpit—never reach full equivalence.
The metaphor does not inspire our full commitment. It is an alluring metaphor
however, particularly because the cockpit's shape and location (in relation to
the body of the plane) remind us of the human head. It might be a useful
metaphor for analyzing the information flow within the cockpit, but it is
imprecise when it comes to understanding human cognition as such. All that is
meant by human cognition does not map precisely unto the cognition as applied
to the airplane cockpit. Clearly some parts of the original definition are
simply left out—the firing of neurons and the transmission of glutamate, GABA,
or dopamine. Some aspect of the cockpit's operation may be likened to those
biological processes, but nobody would hold that they are fully equivalent.

There is a possibility of another, weaker claim to extended digestion, to
continue our example. The conveyance of food from the grocery shelves to the
mouth of an individual airplane passenger may well be an important part of that
passenger's digestive process. We are no longer talking about digestion in a
metaphoric sense, as we did when thinking about the belly of the plane. I mean
now literal digestion, as in "the breaking down of food." In that sense, there
is no reason for us to view our own digestion as much different from a
spider's. The preparation of food external to the human body could be viewed
much in the same way as we view arachnoid digestion. Both are external
processes evolved to aid in the break-down of tissues otherwise difficult to
digest internally. The spider regurgitates enzymes, where we use a knife, a
fork, a cheese grater, or any other kitchen implement for that matter.
Following similar logic, we may view the catering company responsible for
preparing the airline food as part of that extended digestion system. The
cooks, the forks, and the stewards all literally facilitate the break-down and
the conveyance of food into the passenger's belly. More than a thought
experiment, the understanding of digestion in this extended sense could be
quite useful in certain types of analysis, as in identifying the cause of
foodborne illness, for example. In the previous case we were making a
biomorphic analogy between two distinct processes: the digestion of food and
the fuelling or the supply of the plane. But now, we are actually trying to
expand the original concept of digestion, usually thought to be an internal
process, to include all sort of external mechanisms. We are no longer making an
imprecise analogy. Our position is one of true digestive externalism.  But in
expanding the definition of digestion outwards, we run into what I would like
to call "the problem of arbitrary limits." Let us return to cognition for the
moment. In thinking about the cognitive tasks involved in landing a plane, we
began by including the cockpit instrumentation and the communication between
the pilots into the equation. But why limit ourselves to the plane in our
analysis? The runway participates in the landing, and so do the dispatchers in
the control tower. We may then say the airport system as a whole is landing the
plane. That too seems to be an arbitrary boundary. The dispatchers rely on a
global network which memorizes, computes, and predicts landing parameters. At
the limits of this query is unbridled monism. The activity of "landing a plane"
begins to lose its meaning when the activity of the pilot is coupled with the
entire universe.

I conclude then, to say that extending the concept of cognition to the cockpit
of the plane is subject to the limit problem. The disavowal of the body and/or
brain as the natural boundary of cognition leads to an arbitrary placement of
yet another boundary. We have simply substituted the natural physical limits of
the brain with those of the airplane cockpit. And nothing holds us back from
pushing the boundaries of cognition ever outward. Every boundary seems
artificial, and every system seems to be a part of a larger system that could
be seen as participating in the cognitive task at hand. In embracing the
extension hypothesis literally, we have traded metaphoric imprecision for the
problem of arbitrary limits.

http://word.mvps.org/faqs/general/wordvswordperfect.htm
http://wptoolbox.com/tips/MSWordToWP.html
modal vs. other kinds of processing 

If are are to take the hypothesis of extended cognition seriously, we must
treat the tools of cognitive augmentation as seriously as we would our own
mental development, in the traditional sense.



