## Theory

> Marxist cultural sociology is then recognizable, in its simplest outlines,
in studies of different types of institution and formation in cultural
production and distribution, and in the linking of these within whole social
media material processes. Thus distribution, for example, is not limited to
its technical definition and function within a capitalist market, but
connected specifically, to modes of production and then interpreted as the
active formation of readerships and audiences, and of the characteristic
social relations, including economic relations, which which particular forms
of cultural activity are in practice carried out.

*Marxism and Literature*, Raymond Williams, Oxford 1977, 138

Read WU MING

Searle on collective action.
http://www.iep.utm.edu/coll-int/

Plan of book:

1. Theory
2. Stylistics
3. Ethnography


## Object and Method of Study

On an average day in 2008, at home, an average American read around 100,500
words a day. At 250 words per page, that is around 402 printed pages.  Between
the years of 1980 and 2008, the consumption of information in bytes---a
measure that would obviously privilege storage-heavy content like sound and
video---grew at a modest 5.4 percent per year. Reading, in decline until the
advent of the internet, has tripled in the same period. Reading in print
accounted for 26 percent of verbal information consumed in 1960. That number
fell to 9 percent in 2008, but the consumption of words digitally increased to
27 percent of total consumption, which means that reading has increased its
share of the overall household attention span [@bohn_how_2009;
@hilbert_worlds_2011; @hilbert_info_2012]. The first decade of the
twenty-first century saw a 20 percent increase in library visitation
[@u.s._institute_of_museum_and_library_services_public_2010]. According to
UNESCO data, literacy rates continue to rise globally, as the world calibrates
imbalances of access along the lines of gender and geography
[@huebler_adult_2013]. By a conservative estimate, the number of scientific
publications grows at about 4.7 percent per year, which means that the amount
of published research roughly doubles every 15 years or so, and the figures
are much higher in some fields [@archambault_welcome_2005;
@crespi_empirical_2008; @larsen_rate_2010]. The number of books published in
the United States almost tripled from 2005 to 2009 [@bowker_u.s._2009].

All measures point to a drastic expansion of the textual field. At the same
time, we are often told that reading of short stories, novels, poetry, and
plays appears to be at grave risk [stephens_rise_1998;
@merrin_television_1999; @nea_reading_2004; @golumbia_cultural_2009;
@fish_digital_2012; @marche_literature_2012].[^ln2-internet] Something does
not add up. As a society we are reading, writing, and publishing more each
year. The reconciliation of vocabularies locates the source of the perceived
metaphysical threat in the culture's profound alienation from the material
contexts of literary production. The language of literary theory is supremely
tuned to deal with symbols. Only after long reflection, on the order of
centuries, do we begin to note the sheer strangeness of the textual interface:
the medieval palimpsest, the stylus, and the goat parchment. Yet we cannot
afford to care less about the keyboard and the screen today that we do about
ink and paper.  A battle is quietly brewing for the soul of computing and
hence for the control of our basic reading and writing apparatus.

Where literacy thrives, the very nature of what constitutes a literary text
(of any kind) has changed significantly with the advent of ubiquitous
computing and its related techniques involving the internet, integrated
circuits, magnetic storage, miniaturization, and search and suggest
algorithms. By many accounts, the second half of the twentieth century saw a
major technological shift affecting the production, access, and distribution
of knowledge, in a shift comparable in its consequences to those accompanying
the spread of the Gutenberg printing press in the fifteenth century
[@johns_piracy:_2009; @kovarik_revolutions_2011]. Matters always central to
the field of literary studies remain vitally important to the functioning of
modern society. Literary studies, when conceived broadly, provide fertile
grounds for collaboration between diverse disciplines interested in the
changing dynamics of narrative, interpretation, language, form, prosody,
composition, dialog, discourse, story, genre, authorship, influence, and text.
It is in this core conceptual cluster of operational terms that I want to
locate a notion of poetics capable of addressing not only the machinations of
poetry and prose, but also of pixel, code, string, script, inscription, list,
document, file, record, project, and archive.

Why am I reading Latour. Because latour gives us a way to see much lit.  In a
study on the construction of scientific knowledge, Bruno Latour and Steve
Woolgar perform what they call an ethnography of a science lab by exposing the
passage of ideas from applied experiment to literary production. For Woolgar
and Latour a laboratory functions as a factory of sorts, ingesting matter and
artifact to produce fact and inscription, beyond simplistic notions of
knowledge-making and discovery [@latour_laboratory_1986]. A cite of
production. 

Although much cited in the study of culture, science, and technology,
*Laboratory Life* has had less of an impact on the study of literature, even
though Latour and Woolgar borrowed much the other way around. In the 1986
postscript to the American edition, they remark on the broad trend in literary
theory toward treating texts as objects of interpretation, disavowing the kind
of criticism aimed at the "real meaning of texts," at "what the text says,"
"what really happened," or "what the authors intended"
[@latour_laboratory_1986, 273]. Similarly, the authors wanted to aim research
in the social study of science at the "contingent character of objectification
practices." Science, in their view, is itself a type of literary system,
"generating texts whose fate (status, value, utility, facticity) depends
subsequently on interpretation" [@latour_laboratory_1986, 273]. Throughout the
book, Woolgar and Latour use the term literature to mean something "inscribed,
printed, or published," a combination of verbs that coincides with
"literature" consistently throughout [@latour_laboratory_1986, 47-53]. Viewed
as a work of literary theory, *Laboratory Life* reifies the research program
began by the post-structuralists. Where Jacques Derrida could remark
offhandedly that "everything is a text,"[^ln2-derrida] Woolgar and Latour make
concrete the literal transformation of matter into text. No longer was
literature an illustration of something that happens in the laboratory: Latour
and Woolgar showed the laboratory itself to function as an inscription-making
machine.

The conventional way to understand Woolgar and Latour brings the interpreter
into the laboratory, breaking the illusion of scientific objectivity: instead
of "discovering" facts, scientists construct them (therefore, *social
constructivism*). Paradoxically, as Latour and Woolgar worked to undermine the
empirical unity of science (turning it into a kind of hermeneutics), they
performed literary analysis as an empirical method. To "read" the laboratory,
researchers observed the space in person, embedded into the fabric of its
everyday activity. As ethnographers, Woolgar and Latour were interested in
discovering models of objectivity (and science) that emanate from the practice
doing science localized to the particular laboratory under observation. A
theory of knowledge formation therefore becomes visible through ethnographic
description. In the *Laboratory Life* the reader is asked to examines a range
of evidentiary material along with published work. Floor plans, research
samples, workflow diagrams, dialog transcriptions, time sheets, and logbooks
all become a part of the epistemology.

To view Woolgar and Latour as scholars of literature (and not just of
laboratories) is to open up the floodgates of textuality. The laboratory, the
courthouse, the hospital---these institutions cannot be reduced to text, but
the lesson of *Laboratory Life* is that they are, in part, literary systems.
Beneath every scientific discovery, every popular song, every film, radio, or
television serial, every art or architectural project, every political office,
every legal judgment, every restaurant meal, every doctor's prescription,
every website, and every machine manual---beneath that giant and perplexing
pile of human activity lies a complex network of circulating textual
documentation.  Woolgar and Latour show that literary scholarship can involve
more than just reading books, but also making visible that textual
undercurrent: following it and mapping its movements across rooms and offices,
all the while exposing the mechanisms of its mutation and locomotion. It is an
exciting prospect: to view the hospital as a library, where cadres of
physicians and administrators convert human stories into diagnoses, into
controlled vocabularies, into files, into billable codes, into inscriptions,
and into archives. Or to see the legal system as a process of literary
discovery, where legions of attorneys and paralegals pore over terabytes of
textual material, transforming inscription into evidence. That is not all
these institutions are, but they are also that; and there is much work to be
done there for a scholar of literature.
