The author auteur, an individuated god-like genius creator, peaked with
Romanticism, in the late nineteenth century. Modernist writers chipped away at
the very idea of creative agency: the Soviets wrote poetry on factory walls in
collectives, the French circulated algorithms for "potential literature," and
writers such as the American Edward Stratemeyer founded whole fiction
factories, that authored popular stories on an industrial scale, in
syndicates. The author was dead, in other words, long before the post-modern
nail in the authorship coffin. Where the topic of authorship lost some of its
theoretical cache---as judged by a decline in scholarship on the
topic---authorial practices flourished and diversified. Today, we may
routinely watch a television show written by dozens of writers, follow a
social media robot who dabbles in poetry, cite an encyclopedia entry written
by hundreds of contributors, and offer commentary on a literary work written
by a troupe of Sulawesi macaques. Studies of authorship are only beginning to
catch up to a wilderness of practice.

New media are new in so far as they bring the avant-garde into the ordinary.
Three broad trends in contemporary authorship, both ordinary and
under-theorized, require our attention. These include texts that are authored
by means anonymous or pseudo-anonymous, massively collaborative, and, above
all, trans-human.

## Anonymous and Pseudonymous

Let us begin with an intuition. Were you to teach a class on any
topic---political thought or world literature---and were that class to include
an online discussion component---a blog or a forum---would you allow your
students to contribute anonymously? The answer does not come lightly.

On the one hand, discussion forums benefit from strong personalities. A
comment gains deeper significance when we can connect it to a face: who wrote
this, where, and when? What is the link between discourse and identity? An
opinion "means more" when it is contextualized within a relationship to a
specific person.[^ln-person] In the Appendix to his *Concluding Unscientific
Postscript to the Philosophical Fragments*, SÃ¸ren Kierkegaard wrote, under a
pseudonym, "the whole book is about myself, solely about me, 'I, Joh. Cl., now
thirty years old, born in Copenhagen, a plain, ordinary human like
most.'"[@kierkegaard_concluding_2009, 16 & 520] The insistence on identity in
its absence points to the existential ambiguity of writing: the authorial
voice can never equate the person. Authors nevertheless carry what Jean-Paul
Sartre called an incontestable burden of responsibility [@sartre_being_1978,
610]. The French *l'auteur* surely "must be a misprint for *l'autrui*, 'the
Other,'" his English translator added [@sartre_being_1978, 264]. Translation
adds to the burden.

[^ln-person]: See for example "Literature as a Revelation of Personality" in
  @abrams_mirror_1971, 226-256.

On the other hand, anonymity also plays an important social function. My
collocutors may hold views they know to be reprehensible, without
understanding the reasons why. For example, compatriots from the periphery of
the Soviet Union, where I grew up, sometimes express racist or homophobic
opinions. They would like to be convinced otherwise perhaps, but struggle to
begin a discussion on a topic that holds so much negative connotation. An
opportunity to speak anonymously helps broach a difficult conversation. In the
North American letters, a discussion about secession in the 1780s took place
between Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay under a pseudonym,
precisely to allow for a controversial and possibly a damaging view to receive
its due diligence in public.

Anonymity and pseudonymity constitute a powerful discursive strategy. The Wu
Ming foundation is a pseudonym for a group or Italian writers responsible for
the novel *Q*, first published in Italian in 1999, under the name of Luther
Blissett. The Stratemeyer Syndicate, founded in 1906, produced hundreds of
best-selling stories as part of the *Nancy Drew*, *Hardy Boys*, *Tom Swift*,
and *Bobbsey Twins* series. Stratemeyer published hundreds of volumes using
dozens of ghost writers. "His" novels sold in the millions. It is similarly
difficult to disentangle Alexandre Dumas (the senior) from his ghostwriters,
including Auguste Maquet who likely contributed to such popular works as *The
Three Musketeers* (1844), *The Count of Monte-Cristo* (1844), and *Queen
Margot* (1845) [@sainte-beuve_litterature_1839; @allen_toward_1979, 261].

Recently, the activist group Anonymous captured the public imagination.
Anonymous appeals precisely because it is a collective that expresses itself
through an amorphous singular entity. Everyone can be a member, while nobody
in particular is. They derive authority from a diffuse sense of a faceless
commons, where the individual derives it from a sense of self and identity.

In this last regard it is particularly interesting to follow literary scandals
that hinge on the question of authorial identity. "Every so often a book
bursts on the scene and triggers irresistible questions: Who is the author?
What made him a writer? Is the book autobiographical? Is it fantasy?" so
begins the review of the 1999 novel *Sarah*, by J. T. LeRoy---an HIV-positive
teenage boy, later revealed to be a made-up literary persona of Laura Albert
[@texier_lot_2000]. In a lawsuit against the author and her publisher, the
attorney's representing Antidote Films, who bought film rights to the novel,
wrote: "The alleged truth behind the novel created greater sympathy for the
novel's narrative character, Cherry Vanilla, who was supposedly based on
'Leroy' himself."[@noauthor_antidote_2006] When Leroy turned out to be a
pseudonym, the film company sued to recover what it saw as a loss of value.

## Massively Collaborative

Where in some situations the identity of an author underscores the
authenticity of the events, even fictional ones, a sense of authority can also
be created through its apparent absence. *The Economist*---an English-language
weekly in print since 1843---famously omits author bylines. In a column titled
"*The Economist* explains itself," *The Economist* explains:

> [...] having started off as a way for one person to give the impression of
> being many, anonymity has since come to serve the opposite function at *The
> Economist*: it allows many writers to speak with a collective voice. Leaders
> [leading articles] are discussed and debated each week in meetings that are
> open to all members of the editorial staff. Journalists often co-operate on
> articles. And some articles are heavily edited. Accordingly, articles are
> often the work of *The Economist's* hive mind, rather than of a single
> author.

The hive mind gives *The Economist* not only a unified sense of prose style,
but also lends it the authority of a collective, free from individuated ego.
The absence of bylines allows the magazine to maintain a more neutral tone and
therefore to claim a measure of objectivity not available to individual
authors. One cannot appeal to the authority of fame or status when writing for
the magazine. Because no single author benefits from singular articles, the
emphasis is on the overall quality of the publication. Where the anonymity of
a single author undermines authorial voice, the anonymity of a collective
seems to strengthen its claims.

This dynamic is readily apparent on Wikipedia, a monument to modern
encyclopedia making and a massively collaborative enterprise that covers more
than 26 million articles in more than 250 languages. In an opinion piece
penned in 2005, a prominent critic of online culture summarized his experience
of Wikipedia as follows: "garbage, an incoherent hodge-podge of dubious
factoids [...] that adds up to something far less than the sum of its
parts."[@carr_utopia_2016, 4] By 2014, a meta-review of peer-reviewed academic
literature on the quality of Wikipedia found the site exemplary along multiple
markers of excellence: comprehensiveness, currency, readability, and
reliability [@mesgari_sum_2015]. According to Wikipedia, more than 60 million
people have made at least a small edit to the site, while the number of
"active editors" is estimated to be somewhere around 300,000
[@noauthor_wikipedia:authors_2017].

What does it mean for millions of people to become authors of a text, an
encyclopedia? The question is by no means unique to new media. Massive online
collaboration plunges us into an ancient, pre-modern tradition of
participatory storytelling: more similar to the tales my grandmother told me
when I was a child; to the mosaic patterns authorship in the Old Testament,
uncovered by source criticism; and to the Homeric tradition of oral
literature, retold, relived, and embellished with each iteration.[^ls-dh]

[^ls-dh]: On the subject of documentary, supplementary, and fragmentary
  hypotheses of the Pentateuch see @vos_mosaic_1886, @tigay_empirical_1975,
@baden_composition_2012 among many others. The concept of "community
authorship" in particularly relevant to our discussion. See
@farley_protecting_1997; @dozeman_pentateuch:_2011; @thum_sacred_2014;
@subotic_yugoslav_2014.

## Trans-human

Wikipedia seems like a radically participatory institution: one to which
everyone is welcome to contribute. Research into authorship practices on
Wikipedia reveals hidden complications. As the project grew, its participation
rates declined (more readers, less writers) due to increasing and ever-more
hierarchical bureaucracy, the exclusion of newcomers, resistance to new edits,
and outright bias [@suh_singularity_2009; @halfaker_dont_2011;
@keegan_editors_2012; @algan_cooperation_2013]. Women account for less than a
quarter of the site's editors [@forte_all_2012; @hill_wikipedia_2013;
@gruwell_wikipedias_2015]. Cultural bias skews the content to privilege white,
urban, North American, English-language, male, and chauvinist contributors
[@callahan_cultural_2011; @gloor_cultural_2015; @johnson_not_2016]. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, products of a collective intelligence reflect the
socio-economic problems of the underlying collective.

The open-ended nature of Wikipedia implies a trans-human model of authorship,
one that spans not only multiple human contributors, but includes also
organic, algorithmic, and chance elements of composition. No longer the fruit
of unique authors, a text grows, not unlike a wild plant. In this sense,
certain concepts associated with single-source authorship no longer apply. The
line between writer and editor is blurred. There are no more "original
manuscripts," "autographs," "facsimiles," "proofs," or "author corrections."
Instead there are "branches," "revision trees," and "flows."[^ln-flow] One
prunes or cultivates not so much authors an organic text.

[^ln-flow]: I am using the language of version control more generally rather
than Wikipedia page versioning specifically. See @odonovan_distributed_1990;
@churchill_collaborative_1998.

In his influential 1995 paper "How a Cockpit Remembers Its Speeds," Edwin
Hutchins proposed to view complex human endeavours, such as the act of landing
a plane for example, not as products of discrete minds, but as cognition
"extended" or "distributed" across systems: involving multiple people, flight
checklists, and levers and gauges [@hutchins_cognition_1994;
@hutchins_how_1995]. Similar to a team of pilots operating a plane, an author
within a distributed system engages in a continual dialog with other authors,
automated editorial algorithms, and the platform itself. To understand
authorship in such an environment one can begin by charting the literal flows
of information between minds (wetware), computer programs (software), and
infrastructure (hardware).

A page on Wikipedia may reflect the activity of two or more "bots"---software
proxies for author-programmers---engaged in a struggle for authorial control
over an article, with one side vandalizing and the other upholding the site's
editorial standards [@geiger_work_2010]. To conceptualize authorship in this
environment one must analyze the written content, read the code that produced
it, examine the rules and regulations of the community that sanctioned it,
and, in an ethnographic sense, produce a thick description of the platform
that frames the activity. Neither human nor algorithm nor platform constitute
authors in the conventional sense. Rather, authorship emerges in the
interaction between its constituent components.

The causal chain of agency between authors and their works---as it is
reflected in commercial copyright regimes and royalty payment schemes---can no
longer be unambiguously traced to a singular source of creativity within a
system of creation so distributed. For example, the "The Death of the Authors"
project by Femke Snelting and the Intelligence Collective, invited readers to
contribute to a public performance of Anne Frank's diaries (in the original
Dutch), in order to liberate it from the spurious and indefinite copyright
claims by the legal entity which now profits from the work. "By recording a
sentence [from the diaries] you contribute to the construction of Anne Franks
collective voice [...] Furthermore, the sentences will be donated as training
data for free speech recognition software, like Voxforge, which suffer from a
crucial lack of Dutch spoken language."[@snelting_death_2015] In this way, the
words of a young girl who perished in the Holocaust become first a shared
memory, then a legal concept in the public domain, and finally an algorithm,
which benefits the language as a whole.

Whatever is meant by "democratic deliberation," depends vitally on the
questions of authorship, authority, and authenticity. "The authorship system
is broken and may be in need of a radical solution," the editor of the
*British Medical Journal* wrote in response to the increasingly tangled
bylines of medical literature [@smith_authorship:_1997, 992]. Tim Scott,
responded to write that "authorship is a political problem," and that "it
involves staking and maintaining territorial rights, colonisation, and empire
building." [@scott_authorship_1997, 744] Ji-Dong Jia, an associate professor
in a Beijing research center, wrote that "in China only the first author is
eligible for promotion."[@smith_authorship:_1997, 746] A team of researchers
from Ann Arbor analyzed the differences between similar Japanese- and
English-language medical publications to find significant inter-cultural
variation in authorship attribution, which made comparison between journals
difficult [@smith_authorship:_1997, 74]. At a smaller scale, I struggle every
semester with the decision of allowing anonymous comments in my class forum
just as democracy at large is yet to assimilate the incursion of automated
author agents into the public sphere.

The study of authorship in the wild fascinates me precisely because it
concerns the essence of humanity: legal, professional, cultural, and
spiritual. At the extreme end of the spectrum, we encounter truly divine
creators---divine in the sense of design that emerges in the aggregate of
glacial, planetary forces: a single strand of the Deoxyribonucleic acid
molecule (DNA), the visual artifacts of "crown shyness" by which tree canopies
form intricate patterns, typographic "rivers" of white space between words,
and, indeed, life itself. Forms that persist create patterns no more authored
or meaningful than chance arrangements of autumn leaves on the ground, river
tributaries, or the soft patter of rain, which nevertheless attain
significance, however briefly, in the mind of an author: reader, listener,
observer.
